Initial and Pitch Procedures (#469)
vatpac-technology/sops: docs/controller-skills/military.md

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 

> The intial and Pitch is a military approach to enter the pattern. Military aircraft approach on runway heading (the INITIAL) then fly overhead the runway and then make a tight turn onto downwind (the PITCH). To deconflict traffic, military aircraft can be advised to: Pitch Short (abeam the threshold), Pitch (midfield) or Pitch Long (abeam the departure threshold). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**) then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 

- Pitch short (abeam the threshold)
- Pitch (midfield)
- Pitch long (abeam the departure threshold)
```

!!! note

>     Military Aircraft will be doing this approach at high speeds ranging from 240 to 350kts.
>     All airports have different altitude and approach points as such check for the specfic airports sops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Refer to each aerodrome's SOPs for location-specific altitude and approach points.
```

!!! phraseology

>     *VIPR47 is approaching RWY 27 at East Sale via an initial and pitch.*
> **VIPR47**: "Request straight initial RWY 27"
> **ARA**: "VIPR47, cleared straight inital RWY 27 descend 'A015', Pitch Long"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **VIPR47**: "Request straight initial Runway 27"
    **ESA**: "VIPR47, cleared straight inital Runway 27, descend 'A015', pitch long"
```

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 
The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the deadside, parallel to the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**), then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 
- Pitch short (abeam the landing threshold)
- Pitch long (abeam the upwind threshold)

!!! note
   Refer to each aerodrome's SOPs for location-specific altitude and approach points.

!!! phraseology

**VIPR47**: "Request straight initial Runway 27"

> **ESA**: "VIPR47, cleared straight inital Runway 27, descend 'A015', pitch long"

Reviewer 2: All level instructions must include 'TO' or 'TO AND MAINTAIN' after DESCEND/CLIMB.
```suggestion
**ESA**: "VIPR47, cleared straight inital Runway 27, descend to 'A015', pitch long"
```

Reviewer: Additionally, the civil equivalent of something like this would require a 'cleared visual approach' in there somewhere. 

@ST6-Bravo What phraseology is used to authorise an initial and pitch join?

Author: Ill check the ad2 supp for Sale

Author: No mention of having a descend clearance, just an auth to track @mattk04

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 
The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**) then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 
- Pitch short (abeam the threshold)

> - Pitch (midfield)

Reviewer: I assume this is the default? Would the instruction be to 'pitch midfield' or would no pitch instruction be provided?

Author: Default is to pitch midfield

> The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**) then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 
> - Pitch short (abeam the threshold)
> - Pitch (midfield)
> - Pitch long (abeam the departure threshold)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the deadside, parallel to the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**), then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 
- Pitch short (abeam the landing threshold)
- Pitch long (abeam the upwind threshold)
```

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 
The Intial and Pitch is a military approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the deadside, parallel to the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**), then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). To deconflict traffic, aircraft can be instructed to: 

> - Pitch short (abeam the landing threshold)

Author: There are no remarks on seperation apart from aircraft after to be above or below a fighter by 1000ft in the cira.

> - Pitch short (abeam the landing threshold)

Reviewer: Perhaps we can relate pitching short/long to extending downwind/making a tight circuit. Aircraft need to be VFR to conduct an initial and pitch (based on my understanding - they're encouraged to report visual and downgrade ASAP on RTB), so there'd be no separation requirement unless one aircraft is still IFR (in which case, they wouldn't be in the circuit area in close proximity to another aircraft).

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 

> The Intial and Pitch is a military visual approach to the circuit area. Military aircraft approach on the deadside, parallel to the extended runway centreline at high speed (the **initial**), then make a tight turn onto downwind (the **pitch**). Aircraft should be cleared for a visual approach via the relevant initial point by the **TCU controller** and transferred to ADC when appropriate.

Reviewer 3: Spelling mistake. Initial not intial

Reviewer: Fixed

- Flights that are on nominated route segments, except for short position reports when possible.

!!! note
    Military aircraft normally operate NOCOM in military Restricted Areas and Class G airspace only. **Do not** permit NOCOM operations in Civil CTA.

## Initial and Pitch 

> <<<<<<< Updated upstream

Reviewer 3: Seems some conflict markers have been merged in with the <<<<< Updated Upstream

- Pitch short (abeam the landing threshold)
- Pitch long (abeam the upwind threshold)

!!! note
   Refer to each aerodrome's SOPs for location-specific altitude and approach points.

!!! phraseology

**VIPR47**: "Request Visual Approach via Left Initial Runway 27"

> **ESA**: "VIPR47, Cleared Visual Approach via Left Initial Runway 27,pitch long"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ESA**: "VIPR47, Cleared Visual Approach via Left Initial Runway 27, pitch long"
```
